materials/batch_job.md, before:

# Batch jobs

On our own computer, we are used to start a program (job) by clicking on an icon and the program starts instantly. If we start many programs/jobs at the same time, we occasionally run into problems like running out of memory _etc_.  
In an supercomputing environment, the computer is shared among hundreds of other users who all have different resource needs.

A **batch job script** is used to request (estimated) resources and consists of two parts: The resource request and the actual computing step collected in a `sbatch script`. When we submit a batch job script, the job is not started directly, but is sent into a **queue**. Depending on the requested resources and load, the job may need to wait to get started. All heavy computing must be done via batch jobs (see [Usage policy](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/overview/#usage-policy))!

## Example sbatch script

Batch job script [how-to create](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/running/creating-job-scripts-puhti/) and [examples](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/running/example-job-scripts-puhti/) for Puhti.

```
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH --account=project_200xxxx   # Choose the billing project. Has to be defined!
#SBATCH --time=00:02:00             # Maximum duration of the job. Upper limit depends on the partition. 
#SBATCH --partition=test            # Job queues: test, interactive, small, large, longrun, hugemem, hugemem_longrun
#SBATCH --ntasks=1                  # Number of tasks. Upper limit depends on partition. For a serial job this should be set 1!

hostname                    # Print compute node name that has been allocated

``` 

<p>&rarr; File `simple.sh` </p> 
<p>&rarr; Submit for computation with `sbatch simple.sh` </p>

**The best starting point for writing batch job scripts:** [Software specific batch scripts in docs](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/)

:::{admonition} Task
:class: tip

What other `#SBATCH` arguments can you find in [the SLURM documentation](https://slurm.schedmd.com/sbatch.html) that sound useful? 

:::


:::{admonition} What to do if a job fails?
:class: warning

1. Did the job run out of time?
2. Did the job run out of memory?
3. Did the job actually use the resources you specified?
   - Problems in the batch job script can cause parameters to be ignored and default values are used instead
4. Did it fail immediately or did it run for some time?
   - Jobs failing immediately are often due to something simple like typos, missing inputs, bad parameters _etc_.
5. Check the error file captured by the batch job script (default name `slurm-<jobid>.out`)
6. Check any other error files and logs your program may have produced
7. Error messages can sometimes be long, cryptic and a bit intimidating, but ...
   - Try skimming through them and see if you can spot something "human-readable"
   - Often you can spot the actual problem, if you go through the whole message. Something like "required input file so-and-so missing" or "parameter X out of range" _etc_.
8. Consult the [FAQ on common Slurm issues](https://docs.csc.fi/support/faq/why-does-my-batch-job-fail/) in the CSC Docs

:::

Commit message:

add sacct for checking status

materials/batch_job.md, after:

# Batch jobs

On our own computer, we are used to start a program (job) by clicking on an icon and the program starts instantly. If we start many programs/jobs at the same time, we occasionally run into problems like running out of memory _etc_.  
In an supercomputing environment, the computer is shared among hundreds of other users who all have different resource needs.

A **batch job script** is used to request (estimated) resources and consists of two parts: The resource request and the actual computing step collected in a `sbatch script`. When we submit a batch job script, the job is not started directly, but is sent into a **queue**. Depending on the requested resources and load, the job may need to wait to get started. All heavy computing must be done via batch jobs (see [Usage policy](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/overview/#usage-policy))!

## Example sbatch script

Batch job script [how-to create](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/running/creating-job-scripts-puhti/) and [examples](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/running/example-job-scripts-puhti/) for Puhti.

```
#!/bin/bash
#SBATCH --account=project_200xxxx   # Choose the billing project. Has to be defined!
#SBATCH --time=00:02:00             # Maximum duration of the job. Upper limit depends on the partition. 
#SBATCH --partition=test            # Job queues: test, interactive, small, large, longrun, hugemem, hugemem_longrun
#SBATCH --ntasks=1                  # Number of tasks. Upper limit depends on partition. For a serial job this should be set 1!

hostname                    # Print compute node name that has been allocated

``` 

<p>&rarr; File `simple.sh` </p> 
<p>&rarr; Submit for computation with `sbatch simple.sh` </p>

Check your jobs status with `sacct`.

**The best starting point for writing batch job scripts:** [Software specific batch scripts in docs](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/)

:::{admonition} Task
:class: tip

What other `#SBATCH` arguments can you find in [the SLURM documentation](https://slurm.schedmd.com/sbatch.html) that sound useful? 

:::

:::{admonition} What to do if a job fails?
:class: warning

Does `sacct` show you that your job failed? Or did your job not do what you expected (e.g. write some files, etc)? 

1. Did the job run out of time?
2. Did the job run out of memory?
3. Did the job actually use the resources you specified?
   - Problems in the batch job script can cause parameters to be ignored and default values are used instead
4. Did it fail immediately or did it run for some time?
   - Jobs failing immediately are often due to something like typos, missing inputs, bad parameters _etc_.
5. Check the error file captured by the batch job script (default name `slurm-jobid.out`)
6. Check any other error files and logs your program may have produced
7. Error messages can sometimes be long, cryptic and a bit intimidating, but ...
   - Try skimming through them and see if you can spot something "human-readable"
   - Often you can spot the actual problem, if you go through the whole message. Something like "required input file so-and-so missing" or "parameter X out of range" _etc_.
8. Consult the [FAQ on common Slurm issues](https://docs.csc.fi/support/faq/why-does-my-batch-job-fail/) in the CSC Docs

:::
