materials/examples.md, before:

# Research usecases for Puhti

Check out what others have achieved using CSC supercomputers:

## Some interesting usecases from CSC seminars

```{figure} images/Atherton.png
:alt: Path from drone imagery to they can be processed using Puhti batch job with OpenDronemap
:width: 700px
:align: center

Jon Atherton, UH: [Optical sensing and 4D modelling of plant ecophysiological traits](https://a3s.fi/gis-workshops/2022_point_cloud_workshop/atherton_4d_modeling_odm.pdf)

```

```{figure} images/Pyorala.png
:alt: Two point clouds of trees with their extracted stem point cloud
:width: 700px
:align: center

Jiri Pyörälä, UH, NLS/FGI: [Experiences with PCLpy on Puhti](https://a3s.fi/gis-workshops/2022_point_cloud_workshop/pyorala_pclpy.pdf)

```

```{figure} images/Impio.png
:alt: Example result of land cover classification in Northern Finland, computed with sklearn and dask
:width: 700px
:align: center

Mikko Impiö, SYKE: [Modern machine learning for land cover classification](https://a3s.fi/gis-workshops/22_EO_workshop/impio_ml_in_land_cover_classification.pdf)

```
```{figure} images/Kivimaki.png
:alt: Sentinel-2 true color mosaic with its single components in time and space
:width: 700px
:align: center
Arttu Kivimäki, FGI/NLS: [Mosaicking Sentinel-2 data in Puhti](https://a3s.fi/gis-workshops/22_EO_workshop/kivimaki_sen2mosaic.pdf)

```
```{figure} images/ICEYE.png
:alt: Coarse water segmentation probability map based on 512x512 pixel batches, which is too coarse, but too much context would require more computational resources
:width: 700px
:align: center

Tapio Friberg, ICEYE: [LUMI usecase](https://gis-seminars.a3s.fi/2023-06-08-lumi-for-gis-iceye-use-case.pdf)

```
You can find all CSC seminar presentations on [CSC geocomputing research pages](https://research.csc.fi/geocomputing-seminars).

## Some publications from Finland that used Puhti

```{figure} images/YliHeikkila.png
:alt: Crop yield predicton workflow from image download to prediction
:width: 700px
:align: center
Maria Yli-Heikkilä et al, LUKE: [Scalable Crop Yield Prediction with Sentinel-2 Time Series and Temporal Convolutional Network](https://jukuri.luke.fi/handle/10024/552280)
```
```{figure} images/ODM.png
:alt: Example results from OpenDroneMap image processing
:width: 700px
:align: center

Gbagir et al, UEF: [OpenDroneMap: Multi-Platform Performance Analysis](https://www.mdpi.com/2673-7086/3/3/23)
```
```{figure} images/Jutila.png
:alt: Sentinel-1 change detection results 
:width: 700px
:align: center

Eetu Jutila Masters thesis, Aalto: [Land cover change detection using Sentinel-1 satellite images](https://aaltodoc.aalto.fi/bitstream/handle/123456789/119483/master_Jutila_Eetu_2023.pdf)
```
```{figure} images/Balazs.png
:alt: Workflow diagram for deep learning on point clouds
:width: 700px
:align: center
Andras Balazs et al, LUKE:[Comparison of neural networks and k-nearest neighbors methods in forest stand variable estimation using airborne laser data](https://jukuri.luke.fi/handle/10024/551713)
```
```{figure} images/EODIE.jpg
:alt: Workflow diagram of EODIE
:width: 700px
:align: center
Samantha Wittke et al, FGI/Aalto [EODIE - Earth Observation Data Information Extractor](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352711023001176)
```


Know more? -> Please let us know :)

Commit message:

WIP: minor fixes to Samantha's part (#46)
* Update prerequisites.md

* add LUMI links

* Style fix for links

* Adjust to LUMI

* change seminars link sentence

* add lumi link

* Update job_types.md

* add gis-hpc mailing list

materials/examples.md, after:

# Research usecases for Puhti

Check out what others have achieved using CSC supercomputers:

## Some interesting usecases from CSC seminars

```{figure} images/Atherton.png
:alt: Path from drone imagery to they can be processed using Puhti batch job with OpenDronemap
:width: 700px
:align: center

Jon Atherton, UH: [Optical sensing and 4D modelling of plant ecophysiological traits](https://a3s.fi/gis-workshops/2022_point_cloud_workshop/atherton_4d_modeling_odm.pdf)

```

```{figure} images/Pyorala.png
:alt: Two point clouds of trees with their extracted stem point cloud
:width: 700px
:align: center

Jiri Pyörälä, UH, NLS/FGI: [Experiences with PCLpy on Puhti](https://a3s.fi/gis-workshops/2022_point_cloud_workshop/pyorala_pclpy.pdf)

```

```{figure} images/Impio.png
:alt: Example result of land cover classification in Northern Finland, computed with sklearn and dask
:width: 700px
:align: center

Mikko Impiö, SYKE: [Modern machine learning for land cover classification](https://a3s.fi/gis-workshops/22_EO_workshop/impio_ml_in_land_cover_classification.pdf)

```
```{figure} images/Kivimaki.png
:alt: Sentinel-2 true color mosaic with its single components in time and space
:width: 700px
:align: center
Arttu Kivimäki, FGI/NLS: [Mosaicking Sentinel-2 data in Puhti](https://a3s.fi/gis-workshops/22_EO_workshop/kivimaki_sen2mosaic.pdf)

```
```{figure} images/ICEYE.png
:alt: Coarse water segmentation probability map based on 512x512 pixel batches, which is too coarse, but too much context would require more computational resources
:width: 700px
:align: center

Tapio Friberg, ICEYE: [LUMI usecase](https://gis-seminars.a3s.fi/2023-06-08-lumi-for-gis-iceye-use-case.pdf)

```
You can find more use case presentations from [CSC: geocomputing seminars page](https://research.csc.fi/geocomputing-seminars).

## Some publications from Finland that used Puhti

```{figure} images/YliHeikkila.png
:alt: Crop yield predicton workflow from image download to prediction
:width: 700px
:align: center
Maria Yli-Heikkilä et al, LUKE: [Scalable Crop Yield Prediction with Sentinel-2 Time Series and Temporal Convolutional Network](https://jukuri.luke.fi/handle/10024/552280)
```
```{figure} images/ODM.png
:alt: Example results from OpenDroneMap image processing
:width: 700px
:align: center

Gbagir et al, UEF: [OpenDroneMap: Multi-Platform Performance Analysis](https://www.mdpi.com/2673-7086/3/3/23)
```
```{figure} images/Jutila.png
:alt: Sentinel-1 change detection results 
:width: 700px
:align: center

Eetu Jutila Masters thesis, Aalto: [Land cover change detection using Sentinel-1 satellite images](https://aaltodoc.aalto.fi/bitstream/handle/123456789/119483/master_Jutila_Eetu_2023.pdf)
```
```{figure} images/Balazs.png
:alt: Workflow diagram for deep learning on point clouds
:width: 700px
:align: center
Andras Balazs et al, LUKE:[Comparison of neural networks and k-nearest neighbors methods in forest stand variable estimation using airborne laser data](https://jukuri.luke.fi/handle/10024/551713)
```
```{figure} images/EODIE.jpg
:alt: Workflow diagram of EODIE
:width: 700px
:align: center
Samantha Wittke et al, FGI/Aalto [EODIE - Earth Observation Data Information Extractor](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352711023001176)
```


Know more? -> Please let us know :)
