materials/own_project.md, before:

# Own project hints

No matter if you are just starting a new project or already have found suitable tools for your task or maybe even written your own tools.

## Making use of HPC resources

Just moving your workflow or script to the supercomputer does not make it run faster. But there is some things that you can do.

## New project hints

When you start a new project and don't yet know how you are going to approach the task, spend a little time to investigate:
- Which tools are able to solve the kind of task you have?
   - Google your task
   - Ask experienced colleagues or <servicedesk@csc.fi> for guidance
   - Once you found some, if it comes with tutorials, do at least one
      - This will likely be the fastest way forward
      - Naturally, read the manual/instructions
         - It is not only how your software is constructed and compiled that affects performance
         - It may also be run in different ways
- Consider:
   - The software that solves your problem fastest might not always be the best
   - Issues like ease-of-use and compute power/memory/disk demands are also highly relevant
- When you've found the software you want to use, check if it is available at CSC as a [pre-installed optimized version](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/)
   - If it is, use the batch script example from _there_
   - Otherwise, use a [general template](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/running/example-job-scripts-puhti/)
   - If it is not, check if you can install it yourself using [Tykky](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/containers/tykky/) or ask <servicedesk@csc.fi> for help.
- Quite often it is useful to start simple and gradually use more complex approaches if needed
   - Try first running interactively (**not** on a login node)
   - Use the `top` command to get rough estimate of memory use, _etc_.
   - If developers provide some test or example data, run it first and make sure results are correct
   - Before large runs, it's a good idea to do a smaller trial run
      - Check that results are as expected
      - Check the resource usage after the test run and adjust accordingly
   - You can use the _test_ queue to check that your batch job script is correct
      - Limits : 15 min, 2 nodes
      - Job turnaround usually very fast even if machine is "full"
      - Can be useful to spot typos, missing files, _etc_. before submitting a job that will idle in the queue
- How many cores to allocate?
   - This depends on many things, so you have to try, see our [instructions about a scaling test](https://docs.csc.fi/support/tutorials/cmdline-handson/#scaling-test-for-an-mpi-parallel-job)
- If you can't find suitable software, consider writing your own code


## Running your own scripts

To keep track of your script versions by using a version control system, like Git(Hub). This also simplifies collaboration and synchronising your scripts on different computers.

:::{admonition} Reminder for  Puhti 
:class: seealso

* Keep scripts in `/projappl/project_200xxxx/your_groupname/`
* Keep data in `/scratch/project_200xxxx/your_groupname/` during processing, Allas for longer term storage
* Keep personal configuration scripts in `/users/your_username/`
* Puhti webinterface / `scp` for data transfer: own computer - Puhti
* `wget` for data transfer:  internet - Puhti

:::

## FAIR research code

!()[./images/fair-principles.svg]
The Turing Way project illustration by Scriberia. Used under a CC-BY 4.0 licence. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3332807.

Following "good enough" practices for FAIR research code will not only help you rerunning your code again when reviewers would like you to "just run XX again" half a year after you moved on to the next project. It will also make your code more reproducible for others:
* Version control
* Clean directory structure
* Reproducible computing environment
   * Use existing modules
   * Know your dependencies 
   * Containers
* Documentation with code, minimum: README
* Modularity -> simplifies reusability and making things parallel
* License
* Share your code, data, results

You can find self-study materials on these topics from the [CodeRefinery project lessons](https://coderefinery.org/lessons/core/).

Eliminate all hardcoded filepaths in your scripts. Instead read from `stdin` or a configuration file instead.

## Optimizing the performance of your own code


You can use profiling tools to find out how much time is spent in different parts of the code
- Docs CSC: [Performance analysis](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/performance/)
- [Profiling on LUMI](https://docs.lumi-supercomputer.eu/development/profiling/strategies/)
When the computing bottlenecks are identified, try to figure out ways to improve the code
- Again, [servicedesk@csc.fi](mailto:servicedesk@csc.fi) is a channel to ask for help
   - [The more concrete the problem is described, the better](https://docs.csc.fi/support/support-howto/)
- If your issue concerns LUMI, contact the [LUMI User Support Team](https://lumi-supercomputer.eu/user-support/need-help/)


:::{admonition} Advanced topic: Developing scripts remotely
:class: seealso, dropdown

Instead of developing code on your local machine (e.g. laptop) and moving it to the supercomputer for testing, you can also consider to use a local editor and push edited files directly into the remote system via SSH. This works for example with an IDE like _Visual Studio Code_ or a text editor like _Notepad++_. Follow these [detailed instructions to set them up](https://docs.csc.fi/support/tutorials/remote-dev/). Note that [Visual Studio Code](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/webinterface/vscode/) and [Jupyter Notebooks](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/webinterface/jupyter/) are also available through the Puhti web interface

:::

Commit message:

swi updates (#28)
* resource request tips

* thoughts on parallel

* disadvantages of interactive

* mv gdal from qgis to software

* Add special invite

* move disk areas to terminology

* add images to examples

* add image instructions

* change parallel task to pea soup

* fix link

* fix box

* add notes on setup and materials

* course project fix

* mv examples to earlier

* small fixes and rearranges

* add notes on python exercise

* add example

* note on starting point

* typo

materials/own_project.md, after:

# Own project hints

No matter if you are just starting a new project or already have found suitable tools for your task or maybe even written your own tools.

## Making use of HPC resources

Just moving your workflow or script to the supercomputer does not make it run faster. But there is some things that you can do.

## New project hints

When you start a new project and don't yet know how you are going to approach the task, spend a little time to investigate:
- Which tools are able to solve the kind of task you have?
   - Google your task
   - Ask experienced colleagues or <servicedesk@csc.fi> for guidance
   - Once you found some, if it comes with tutorials, do at least one
      - This will likely be the fastest way forward
      - Read the manual/instructions
         - Consider different ways your software can be run
- Fastest vs. ease-of-use and compute power/memory/disk demands 
- When you've found the software you want to use, check if it is available at CSC as a [pre-installed optimized version](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/)
   - If it is, check if it has an example batch script 
   - Otherwise, use a [general batch job script template](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/running/example-job-scripts-puhti/)
- If it is not, check if you can install it yourself using [Tykky](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/containers/tykky/) or ask <servicedesk@csc.fi> for help.
- Quite often it is useful to start simple and gradually use more complex approaches if needed
   - Try first running interactively (**not** on a login node)
   - Use the `top` command to get rough estimate of memory use, _etc_.
   - Before large runs, it's a good idea to do a smaller trial run
      - Check that results are as expected
      - Check the resource usage after the test run and adjust accordingly
      - If developers provide some test or example data, run it first and make sure results are correct
   - You can use the _test_ queue to check that your batch job script is correct
      - Limits : 15 min, 2 nodes
      - Job turnaround usually very fast even if machine is "full"
      - Can be useful to spot typos, missing files, _etc_. before submitting a job that will idle in the queue
- How many cores to allocate?
   - This depends on many things, so you have to try, see our [instructions about a scaling test](https://docs.csc.fi/support/tutorials/cmdline-handson/#scaling-test-for-an-mpi-parallel-job)
- If you can't find suitable software, consider writing your own code


## Running your own scripts

To keep track of your script versions by using a version control system, like Git(Hub). This also simplifies collaboration and synchronising your scripts on different computers.

:::{admonition} Reminder for  Puhti 
:class: seealso

* Keep scripts in `/projappl/project_200xxxx/your_groupname/`
* Keep data in `/scratch/project_200xxxx/your_groupname/` during processing, Allas for longer term storage
* Keep personal configuration scripts in `/users/your_username/`
* Puhti webinterface / `scp` for data transfer: own computer - Puhti
* `wget` for data transfer:  internet - Puhti

:::

:::{admonition} Moving own script
:class: seealso
When moving a Python script from your own computer to Puhti, take care of any hard-coded file dependencies (e.g.  `/my/home/dir/file.txt` ). It is not recommended to have hard-coded file paths in your scripts, instead, provide them as command line input to your script or make use of configuration files. No matter where you input your file paths, always make sure that you have the actual data files also available on Puhti. Also check that all used Python packages are available on Puhti, eg within the [geoconda module](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/geoconda). If needed, you can [add Python packages for your own usage](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/python/#installing-python-packages-to-existing-modules) also yourself.
Also read the [Puhti batch job system documentation](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/running/getting-started/)
:::


## FAIR research code

!()[./images/fair-principles.svg]
The Turing Way project illustration by Scriberia. Used under a CC-BY 4.0 licence. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3332807.

Following "good enough" practices for FAIR research code will not only help you rerunning your code again when reviewers would like you to "just run XX again" half a year after you moved on to the next project. It will also make your code more reproducible for others:
* Version control
* Clean directory structure
* Reproducible computing environment
   * Use existing modules
   * Know your dependencies 
   * Containers
* Documentation with code, minimum: README
* Modularity -> simplifies reusability and making things parallel
* License
* Share your code, data, results

You can find self-study materials on these topics from the [CodeRefinery project lessons](https://coderefinery.org/lessons/core/).

Eliminate all hardcoded filepaths in your scripts. Instead read from `stdin` or a configuration file instead.

## Optimizing the performance of your own code


You can use profiling tools to find out how much time is spent in different parts of the code
- Docs CSC: [Performance analysis](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/performance/)
- [Profiling on LUMI](https://docs.lumi-supercomputer.eu/development/profiling/strategies/)
When the computing bottlenecks are identified, try to figure out ways to improve the code


:::{admonition} Advanced topic: Developing scripts remotely
:class: seealso, dropdown

Instead of developing code on your local machine (e.g. laptop) and moving it to the supercomputer for testing, you can also consider to use a local editor and push edited files directly into the remote system via SSH. This works for example with an IDE like _Visual Studio Code_ or a text editor like _Notepad++_. Follow these [detailed instructions to set them up](https://docs.csc.fi/support/tutorials/remote-dev/). Note that [Visual Studio Code](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/webinterface/vscode/) and [Jupyter Notebooks](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/webinterface/jupyter/) are also available through the Puhti web interface

:::
