materials/practicalities.md, before:

# Practicalities

All hands-on activities of this course can be carried out with [CSC's supercomputer Puhti's webinterface](https://puhti.csc.fi), which you can access via your favorite webbrowser. For this, you do not need any additional software installed on your own computer.

For using Puhti, a [CSC account](https://docs.csc.fi/accounts/how-to-create-new-user-account/) is needed.

## Code of Conduct

We strive to follow the [Contributor Covenant Code of Conduct](https://www.contributor-covenant.org/) to foster an inclusive and welcoming environment for everyone.

In short:

* Use welcoming and inclusive language
* Be respectful of different viewpoints and experiences
* Gracefully accept constructive criticism
* Focus on what is best for the community
* Show courtesy and respect towards other community members
* Contact details to report CoC violations: katri.tegel@csc.fi

Furthermore, as this is a hands-on, interactive workshop:

* Be kind to each other and help each other as best you can.
* If you can’t help someone or there is some problem, let someone know.

Finally, if you notice something that prevents you from learning as well as you can, let us know and don’t suffer silently, even the “little things”:

* Volume too low?
* Font size too small?
* Generally confusing instructor?
* Not enough breaks?

This CoC text is provided by [ENCCS instructor training](https://enccs.github.io/instructor-training/).

Commit message:

swi updates (#28)
* resource request tips

* thoughts on parallel

* disadvantages of interactive

* mv gdal from qgis to software

* Add special invite

* move disk areas to terminology

* add images to examples

* add image instructions

* change parallel task to pea soup

* fix link

* fix box

* add notes on setup and materials

* course project fix

* mv examples to earlier

* small fixes and rearranges

* add notes on python exercise

* add example

* note on starting point

* typo

materials/practicalities.md, after:

# Practicalities

## New materials

This is a new way for us to give this course, please excuse any small inconsistencies etc and give us feedback on how this works for you. 

## CSC account 

All hands-on activities of this course can be carried out with [CSC's supercomputer Puhti's webinterface](https://puhti.csc.fi), which you can access via your favorite webbrowser. For this, you do not need any additional software installed on your own computer.

For using Puhti, a [CSC account](https://docs.csc.fi/accounts/how-to-create-new-user-account/) is needed.

## Course format

Hybrid course with lecture and hands-on exercises. It is recommended for online participants to have an extra screen available, to be able to follow the meeting, as well as the lecture materials and the Puhti webinterface. All questions should go to the collaborative document. This ensures fair chance for everyone to ask questions, and also to archive Q&A for everyone.

## Information overload

Depending on how you work with a computer, this course may bring you a lot of new information at once. Please do not get discouraged. This material will be available also after the course for your review. The best way to understand the concepts better is to start implementing your own work and ask for help when you have questions.

## Starting point

There is much more to a supercomputer and the proper use of its resources than this course covers. If this got you interested, please check out our [CSC training calendar](https://www.csc.fi/en/training#training-calendar) for more advanced courses.

## Course participant statistics

TODO: add stats from webropol

## Code of Conduct

We strive to follow the [Contributor Covenant Code of Conduct](https://www.contributor-covenant.org/) to foster an inclusive and welcoming environment for everyone.

In short:

* Use welcoming and inclusive language
* Be respectful of different viewpoints and experiences
* Gracefully accept constructive criticism
* Focus on what is best for the community
* Show courtesy and respect towards other community members
* Contact details to report CoC violations: katri.tegel@csc.fi

Furthermore, as this is a hands-on, interactive workshop:

* Be kind to each other and help each other as best you can.
* If you can’t help someone or there is some problem, let someone know.

Finally, if you notice something that prevents you from learning as well as you can, let us know and don’t suffer silently, even the “little things”:

* Volume too low?
* Font size too small?
* Generally confusing instructor?
* Not enough breaks?

This CoC text is provided by [ENCCS instructor training](https://enccs.github.io/instructor-training/).
