materials/software.md, before:

# GIS tools

## GIS tools available in Puhti

* [Ames Stereo Pipeline](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/ames-stereo.md) for processing stereo images
* [ArcGIS Python API](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/arcgis.md) 
* [CloudCompare](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/cloudcompare.md) for visualizing, editing and processing poing clouds
* [FORCE](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/force.md) for mass-processing of medium-resolution satellite images
* [GDAL](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/gdal.md) for geospatial data formats
* [Geoconda](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/geoconda.md) - Python spatial analysis libraries
* [GRASS GIS](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/grass.md) General purpose GIS software family for viewing, editing and analysing geospatial data
* [LAStools](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/lastools.md) for LiDAR datasets
* [OpenDroneMap](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/opendronemap.md) for processing aerial drone imagery
* [Orfeo ToolBox](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/otb.md) for remote sensing applications
* [PCL](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/pcl.md) for 2D/3D image and point cloud processing
* [PDAL](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/pdal.md) for point cloud translations and processing
* [QGIS](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/qgis.md) General purpose GIS software family for viewing, editing and analysing geospatial data
* [R for GIS](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/r-env-for-gis.md) R spataial analysis libraries
* [SAGA GIS](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/saga-gis.md) General purpose GIS software family for viewing, editing and analysing geospatial data
* [Sen2Cor](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/sen2cor.md) for atmospheric-, terrain and cirrus correction of the Sentinel-2 products
* [Sen2mosaic](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/sen2mosaic.md) for download, preprocessing and mosaicing of Sentinel-2 products
* [SNAP](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/snap.md) for remote sensing applications
* [WhiteboxTools](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/whiteboxtools.md) an advanced geospatial data analysis platform
* [Zonation](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/zonation.md) Spatial conservation prioritization framework
* [pytorch](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/pytorch.md) for deep learning
* [tensorflow](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/tensorflow.md) for deep learning 


## GIS tools available in Mahti

* [Geoconda](geoconda.md) - Python spatial analysis libraries
* [pytorch](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/pytorch.md) for deep learning
* [tensorflow](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/tensorflow.md) for deep learning 

## GIS tools available in LUMI

* [GDAL](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/gdal.md) for geospatial data formats
* [GRASS GIS](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/grass.md) General purpose GIS software family for viewing, editing and analysing geospatial data
* [PDAL](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/pdal.md) for point cloud translations and processing
* [QGIS](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/qgis.md) General purpose GIS software family for viewing, editing and analysing geospatial data
* [SAGA GIS](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/saga-gis.md) General purpose GIS software family for viewing, editing and analysing geospatial data
* [pytorch](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/pytorch.md) for deep learning
* [tensorflow](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/tensorflow.md) for deep learning
* Additional, easy to install yourself [EasyBuild recepies](https://lumi-supercomputer.github.io/LUMI-EasyBuild-docs) for CGAL, GDAL, GEOS, ncview, PROJ, R.

## Documentation
* [Puhti and Mahti softwate pages](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/by_discipline/#geosciences)
* [LUMI software pages](https://docs.lumi-supercomputer.eu/software/)

 Something missing?
      Ask us :)
      servicedesk@csc.fi

## Geospatial software NOT available in supercomputers

* Servers -> these can be run in cPouta
	* Web map servers
		* GeoServer, MapServer
	* Database
		* PostGIS, MongoDB
	* Web map services
		OpenLayers, Leaflet
	* [Installation guidelines for ArcPy, GeoServer, MetaShape, PostGIS and containers (for example OpenDroneMap) in cPouta](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/tree/master/pouta).
* Tools available for Windows only -> no good option from CSC services
	* ArcGIS, TerraScan 


## Skills needed 

* Some GIS tool listed above
* Basic Linux skills in commandline: changing folder, running tools, file permissions
	* [CSC Linux tutorial](https://docs.csc.fi/support/tutorials/env-guide/)
* Scripting skills: 
	* Python: [Python GIS learning materials](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/geoconda/#references)
	* R: [Spatial R learning materials](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/r-env-for-gis/#references) 
	* bash: [CSC bash tutorial](https://docs.csc.fi/support/tutorials/env-guide/linux-bash-scripts/)
	* ...
* Parallelization: Python/Dask, R, GNU-parallel

## GIS tools with R, Python or CLI support

| Software | R | Python | CLI | 
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| CloudCompare | - | [CloudComPy*](https://www.simulation.openfields.fr/documentation/CloudComPy/html/) | Yes |
| GRASS | [rgrass*](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/rgrass/index.html) | [GRASS GIS Python libraries](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass82/manuals/libpython/index.html) | [Yes](https://grasswiki.osgeo.org/wiki/Shell_scripting) |
| OrfeoToolBox | - | [OTB Python API*](https://www.orfeo-toolbox.org/CookBook/PythonAPI.html) | [Yes](https://www.orfeo-toolbox.org/CookBook/CliInterface.html) |
| PDAL | - | [pdal](https://pdal.io/en/latest/python.html) | [Yes](https://pdal.io/en/latest/apps/index.html) |
| QGIS | [qgisprocess*](https://cloud.r-project.org/web/packages/qgisprocess/index.html) | [PyQGIS](https://docs.qgis.org/testing/en/docs/pyqgis_developer_cookbook/) | [qgis_process](https://docs.qgis.org/latest/en/docs/user_manual/processing/standalone.html) |
| SagaGIS | [Rsagacmd](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/Rsagacmd/index.html) | PySAGA* | [saga_cmd](https://sourceforge.net/p/saga-gis/wiki/Executing%20Modules%20with%20SAGA%20CMD/) |
| SNAP | - | [snappy](https://senbox.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/SNAP/pages/19300362/How+to+use+the+SNAP+API+from+Python), [snapista](https://snap-contrib.github.io/snapista/gettingstarted.html) | [GPT](https://senbox.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/SNAP/pages/70503475/Bulk+Processing+with+GPT) |
| WhiteboxTools | [whiteboxR*](https://github.com/opengeos/whiteboxR) | [WhiteboxTools](https://www.whiteboxgeo.com/manual/wbt_book/python_scripting/using_whitebox_tools.html)| [Yes](https://www.whiteboxgeo.com/manual/wbt_book/command_prompt.html) |

Additionally Ames Stereo Pipeline, FORCE, LasTools, OpenDroneMap, PCL and Zonation have commandline interface.

`* are not available in Puhti currently, but should be possible to install, ask if you need.`
 
## Modules

* Puhti is a shared computing environment 
* Software is loaded with modules
	* Mutually incompatible software
	* One module: single program or group of similar programs
	* Modules load applications, adjust path settings and set environment variables
	* Check documentation for available module names and versions.

Example. Loading module for R

```
module load r-env 
```

Commit message:

mv gdal from qgis to software

materials/software.md, after:

# GIS tools

## GIS tools available in Puhti

* [Ames Stereo Pipeline](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/ames-stereo.md) for processing stereo images
* [ArcGIS Python API](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/arcgis.md) 
* [CloudCompare](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/cloudcompare.md) for visualizing, editing and processing poing clouds
* [FORCE](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/force.md) for mass-processing of medium-resolution satellite images
* [GDAL](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/gdal.md) for geospatial data formats
* [Geoconda](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/geoconda.md) - Python spatial analysis libraries
* [GRASS GIS](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/grass.md) General purpose GIS software family for viewing, editing and analysing geospatial data
* [LAStools](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/lastools.md) for LiDAR datasets
* [OpenDroneMap](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/opendronemap.md) for processing aerial drone imagery
* [Orfeo ToolBox](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/otb.md) for remote sensing applications
* [PCL](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/pcl.md) for 2D/3D image and point cloud processing
* [PDAL](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/pdal.md) for point cloud translations and processing
* [QGIS](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/qgis.md) General purpose GIS software family for viewing, editing and analysing geospatial data
* [R for GIS](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/r-env-for-gis.md) R spataial analysis libraries
* [SAGA GIS](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/saga-gis.md) General purpose GIS software family for viewing, editing and analysing geospatial data
* [Sen2Cor](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/sen2cor.md) for atmospheric-, terrain and cirrus correction of the Sentinel-2 products
* [Sen2mosaic](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/sen2mosaic.md) for download, preprocessing and mosaicing of Sentinel-2 products
* [SNAP](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/snap.md) for remote sensing applications
* [WhiteboxTools](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/whiteboxtools.md) an advanced geospatial data analysis platform
* [Zonation](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/zonation.md) Spatial conservation prioritization framework
* [pytorch](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/pytorch.md) for deep learning
* [tensorflow](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/tensorflow.md) for deep learning 


## GIS tools available in Mahti

* [Geoconda](geoconda.md) - Python spatial analysis libraries
* [pytorch](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/pytorch.md) for deep learning
* [tensorflow](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/tensorflow.md) for deep learning 

## GIS tools available in LUMI

* [GDAL](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/gdal.md) for geospatial data formats
* [GRASS GIS](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/grass.md) General purpose GIS software family for viewing, editing and analysing geospatial data
* [PDAL](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/pdal.md) for point cloud translations and processing
* [QGIS](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/qgis.md) General purpose GIS software family for viewing, editing and analysing geospatial data
* [SAGA GIS](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/saga-gis.md) General purpose GIS software family for viewing, editing and analysing geospatial data
* [pytorch](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/pytorch.md) for deep learning
* [tensorflow](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/tensorflow.md) for deep learning
* Additional, easy to install yourself [EasyBuild recepies](https://lumi-supercomputer.github.io/LUMI-EasyBuild-docs) for CGAL, GDAL, GEOS, ncview, PROJ, R.

## Documentation
* [Puhti and Mahti softwate pages](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/by_discipline/#geosciences)
* [LUMI software pages](https://docs.lumi-supercomputer.eu/software/)

 Something missing?
      Ask us :)
      servicedesk@csc.fi

## Geospatial software NOT available in supercomputers

* Servers -> these can be run in cPouta
	* Web map servers
		* GeoServer, MapServer
	* Database
		* PostGIS, MongoDB
	* Web map services
		OpenLayers, Leaflet
	* [Installation guidelines for ArcPy, GeoServer, MetaShape, PostGIS and containers (for example OpenDroneMap) in cPouta](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/tree/master/pouta).
* Tools available for Windows only -> no good option from CSC services
	* ArcGIS, TerraScan 


## Skills needed 

* Some GIS tool listed above
* Basic Linux skills in commandline: changing folder, running tools, file permissions
	* [CSC Linux tutorial](https://docs.csc.fi/support/tutorials/env-guide/)
* Scripting skills: 
	* Python: [Python GIS learning materials](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/geoconda/#references)
	* R: [Spatial R learning materials](https://docs.csc.fi/apps/r-env-for-gis/#references) 
	* bash: [CSC bash tutorial](https://docs.csc.fi/support/tutorials/env-guide/linux-bash-scripts/)
	* ...
* Parallelization: Python/Dask, R, GNU-parallel

## GIS tools with R, Python or CLI support

| Software | R | Python | CLI | 
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| CloudCompare | - | [CloudComPy*](https://www.simulation.openfields.fr/documentation/CloudComPy/html/) | Yes |
| GRASS | [rgrass*](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/rgrass/index.html) | [GRASS GIS Python libraries](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass82/manuals/libpython/index.html) | [Yes](https://grasswiki.osgeo.org/wiki/Shell_scripting) |
| OrfeoToolBox | - | [OTB Python API*](https://www.orfeo-toolbox.org/CookBook/PythonAPI.html) | [Yes](https://www.orfeo-toolbox.org/CookBook/CliInterface.html) |
| PDAL | - | [pdal](https://pdal.io/en/latest/python.html) | [Yes](https://pdal.io/en/latest/apps/index.html) |
| QGIS | [qgisprocess*](https://cloud.r-project.org/web/packages/qgisprocess/index.html) | [PyQGIS](https://docs.qgis.org/testing/en/docs/pyqgis_developer_cookbook/) | [qgis_process](https://docs.qgis.org/latest/en/docs/user_manual/processing/standalone.html) |
| SagaGIS | [Rsagacmd](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/Rsagacmd/index.html) | PySAGA* | [saga_cmd](https://sourceforge.net/p/saga-gis/wiki/Executing%20Modules%20with%20SAGA%20CMD/) |
| SNAP | - | [snappy](https://senbox.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/SNAP/pages/19300362/How+to+use+the+SNAP+API+from+Python), [snapista](https://snap-contrib.github.io/snapista/gettingstarted.html) | [GPT](https://senbox.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/SNAP/pages/70503475/Bulk+Processing+with+GPT) |
| WhiteboxTools | [whiteboxR*](https://github.com/opengeos/whiteboxR) | [WhiteboxTools](https://www.whiteboxgeo.com/manual/wbt_book/python_scripting/using_whitebox_tools.html)| [Yes](https://www.whiteboxgeo.com/manual/wbt_book/command_prompt.html) |

Additionally Ames Stereo Pipeline, FORCE, LasTools, OpenDroneMap, PCL and Zonation have commandline interface.

`* are not available in Puhti currently, but should be possible to install, ask if you need.`

:::{admonition} Moving from GUI to CLI
:class: seealso
If you have only used Graphical User Interfaces thus far, but are curious to get started with the Command Line Interface you can try recreating e.g. GDAL commands shown in some QGIS tools.
![](./images/QGIS_GDAL.png)
:::
 
## Modules

* Puhti is a shared computing environment 
* Software is loaded with modules
	* Mutually incompatible software
	* One module: single program or group of similar programs
	* Modules load applications, adjust path settings and set environment variables
	* Check documentation for available module names and versions.

Example. Loading module for R

```
module load r-env 
```
