materials/support.md, before:

# CSC support

## General problem solving

1. Go to [docs.csc.fi](https://docs.csc.fi) and check in the right section in the _navigation_
2. Try the [FAQ](https://docs.csc.fi/support/faq/)
3. Try the search function in CSC Docs or search the web
   - Type a keyword in CSC Docs, copy/paste the error message in your favorite search engine
4. Send an email to [servicedesk@csc.fi](mailto:servicedesk@csc.fi) containing:
   - A descriptive title
   - What you wanted to achieve and on which which computer
   - Which commands you have given
   - What error messages resulted
   - [More tips to help us quickly solve your issue](https://docs.csc.fi/support/support-howto/)


## Support pages and channels

[`docs.csc.fi`](https://docs.csc.fi)

[`research.csc.fi`](https://research.csc.fi)

+ servicedesk@csc.fi

+ User support session in Zoom every Wednesday at 14.00


## How we can help

![](images/help_bubbles.drawio.svg)

<p><b>&rarr; servicedesk@csc.fi</b></p> 

![](images/project_partner.drawio.svg)

<p><b>&rarr;CSC as project partner / subcontractor</b></p>

Commit message:

swi updates (#28)
* resource request tips

* thoughts on parallel

* disadvantages of interactive

* mv gdal from qgis to software

* Add special invite

* move disk areas to terminology

* add images to examples

* add image instructions

* change parallel task to pea soup

* fix link

* fix box

* add notes on setup and materials

* course project fix

* mv examples to earlier

* small fixes and rearranges

* add notes on python exercise

* add example

* note on starting point

* typo

materials/support.md, after:

# CSC support

## General problem solving

1. Go to [docs.csc.fi](https://docs.csc.fi) and check in the right section in the _navigation_
2. Try the [FAQ](https://docs.csc.fi/support/faq/)
3. Try the search function in CSC Docs or search the web
   - Type a keyword in CSC Docs, copy/paste the error message in your favorite search engine
4. Send an email to [servicedesk@csc.fi](mailto:servicedesk@csc.fi) containing:
   - A descriptive title
   - What you wanted to achieve and on which which computer
   - Which commands you have given
   - What error messages resulted
   - [More tips to help us to more quickly solve your issue](https://docs.csc.fi/support/support-howto/)


## Support pages and channels

[`docs.csc.fi`](https://docs.csc.fi)

[`research.csc.fi`](https://research.csc.fi)

+ servicedesk@csc.fi

+ User support session in Zoom every Wednesday at 14.00 (join on 18.10 for course specific questions! :) )


## How we can help

![](images/help_bubbles.drawio.svg)

<p><b>&rarr; servicedesk@csc.fi</b></p> 

![](images/project_partner.drawio.svg)

<p><b>&rarr;CSC as project partner / subcontractor</b></p>
