materials/terminal.md, before:

# Terminal


## Why would you want to use the terminal?

A typing-based interface is often called a command-line interface, or CLI, to distinguish it from a graphical user interface, or GUI. The heart of a CLI is a read-evaluate-print loop, or REPL: when the user types a command and then presses the Enter (or Return) key, the computer reads it, executes it, and prints its output. 

Shell is the standard way to interact with a supercomputer. It is worth learning the basics and getting comfortable with the "black box".

:::{admonition} Some terminal magic
:class: tip

Did you every want to count all the files in a directory? Or lines in a file? Apart from opening the file in an editor, turning on line numbers or counting them manually you can also use a neat little command line tool called `wc`.

Check out the documentation for `wc` and see if you can find out how to 
1. Count the number of lines/characters of file `/appl/data/geo/syke/natura/Readme_natura.txt`.
2. Count all directories in `/appl/data/geo/syke`.

If this was too easy, can you count only the directory and file names that include `2021` in the syke directory? 

You can use the "login shell" via the Puhti webinterface for this exercise.

:::{admonition} Solution
:class: dropdown

`man wc` for finding the documentation. Use `q` to exit the documentation.

1. `wc -m /appl/data/geo/syke/natura/Readme_natura.txt` to count the characters in the file. Or `cat /appl/data/geo/syke/natura/Readme_natura.txt | wc -m` -> 177
2. `ls /appl/data/geo/syke | wc -l` , we pipe the output of `ls` which is a list of files into `wc` which by defining `-l`
 prints out the amount of newlines (= number of lines) -> 200

Count all directory and file names that include `2021`:  `ls *2021* | wc -l` -> 156

:::
:::


## Basic Linux commands

Do you remember on how you edited some files in the web interface? Let's do the same thing again; only from the command line:

### Navigating folders

1. Login to the Puhti web interface, and start a login shell; first, check which directory you are in by typing `pwd` and hitting `Enter`:

```bash
pwd
```
2. We would like to create a new directory in our projects scratch students directory with our name, let's move there:

```bash
cd /scratch/project_200xxxx/students
```

2. Check if there are any files:

```bash
ls
```

3. Make a directory with your name (you can either type it or use the variable $USER) and see if it appears:

```bash
mkdir $USER    
ls
```

4. Go to that directory.

```bash
cd $USER      
```

:::{admonition} Auto complete
:class: seealso
If you just type `cd` and the first letter of the folder name, then hit `tab` key, the terminal completes the name. Handy!
:::


Add an empty file into this directory. 

```bash
touch $USER-first-file.txt    
```

Check that it is empty:

```bash
cat $USER-first-file.txt        
```

Fill it with some content:

:::{admonition} Command line editor
:class: seealso
These exercises are done with the `nano` editor, but you can use your favorite editor too.
Here's a [nano cheat sheet](https://www.nano-editor.org/dist/latest/cheatsheet.html).
:::


1. Open the file with `nano`:

```bash
nano $USER-first-file.txt     
```

2. Edit the file. Type something there!
3. Exit `nano` with `Ctrl+X`, type `Y` to confirm saving and press enter to accept the filename.
4. Check that the modifications are actually there:

```bash
less $USER-first-file.txt     
```

5. Exit the preview with `q`.


## Exploring files


1. Download a file into this new folder. Use the command `wget` for downloading from a URL:

```bash
wget https://github.com/csc-training/csc-env-eff/raw/master/_hands-on/linux_prerequisites/my-first-file.txt
```

2. Check what kind of file you got and what size it is using the `ls` command with some extra options:

```bash
ls -lth         # options are l for long format, t for sorting by time and h for convenient size units. 
```

3. Use the `less` command to check out what the file looks like:

```bash
less my-first-file.txt
```

4. To exit the `less` preview of the file, hit `q`.

:::{admonition} Tip
:class: seealso
Instead of `less` you can use `cat` which prints the content of the file(s) straight into the command line. For long texts `less` is recommended.
:::

5. Make a copy of this file:

```bash
cp my-first-file.txt $USER-second-file.txt    
ls -lth
less $USER-second-file.txt                    
```

6. Remove the file we originally downloaded (leave your own copy).

```bash
rm my-first-file.txt
ls
```

:::{admonition} Moving files
:class: seealso
If you don't want to have duplicate files you can use `mv` to 'move/rename' the file. Syntax is the same: `mv /path/to/source/oldname /path/to/destination/newname`.
:::


:::{admonition} Re-executing commands from `history`
:class: seealso
If you remember *a part of a command* that you have used recently you can search for it with the command `history | grep string`. This will show all your used commands that have included the string `string` (replace this with the pattern you are searching for).
:::

Commit message:

move terminal before basics and edit shell text

materials/terminal.md, after:

# Terminal


## Why would you want to use the terminal?

A terminal is a text input and output environment. A shell is the primary interface that users see when they log in, whose primary purpose is to start other programs. 

A typing-based interface is often called a command-line interface, or CLI, to distinguish it from a graphical user interface, or GUI. The heart of a CLI is a read-evaluate-print loop, or REPL: when the user types a command and then presses the Enter (or Return) key, the computer reads it, executes it, and prints its output. 

Shell is the standard way to interact with a supercomputer. It is worth learning the basics and getting comfortable with the "black box", to make efficient use of the resources.

The terms terminal, command line and shell are often used interchangably, even though they mean slightly different things. 

:::{admonition} Some terminal magic
:class: tip

Did you every want to count all the files in a directory? Or lines in a file? Apart from opening the file in an editor, turning on line numbers or counting them manually you can also use a neat little command line tool called `wc`.

Check out the documentation for `wc` and see if you can find out how to 
1. Count the number of lines/characters of file `/appl/data/geo/syke/natura/Readme_natura.txt`.
2. Count all directories in `/appl/data/geo/syke`.

If this was too easy, can you count only the directory and file names that include `2021` in the syke directory? 

You can use the "login shell" via the Puhti webinterface for this exercise.

:::{admonition} Solution
:class: dropdown

`man wc` for finding the documentation. Use `q` to exit the documentation.

1. `wc -m /appl/data/geo/syke/natura/Readme_natura.txt` to count the characters in the file. Or `cat /appl/data/geo/syke/natura/Readme_natura.txt | wc -m` -> 177
2. `ls /appl/data/geo/syke | wc -l` , we pipe the output of `ls` which is a list of files into `wc` which by defining `-l`
 prints out the amount of newlines (= number of lines) -> 200

Count all directory and file names that include `2021`:  `ls *2021* | wc -l` -> 156

:::
:::


## Basic Linux commands

Do you remember on how you edited some files in the web interface? Let's do the same thing again; only from the command line:

### Navigating folders

1. Login to the Puhti web interface, and start a login shell; first, check which directory you are in by typing `pwd` and hitting `Enter`:

```bash
pwd
```
2. Then check your username, by typing `echo $USER` and `Enter`. `$USER` (note the `$` in the beginning) is an environment variable which stores your CSC username. `echo` is a command that allows us to display text that is given as an argument (try also `echo hello`).

```bash
echo $USER
```

2. We would like to create a new directory in our projects scratch students directory with our name, let's move there:

```bash
cd /scratch/project_200xxxx/students
```

2. Check if there are any files:

```bash
ls
```

3. Make a directory with your name (you can either type it or use the variable $USER) and see if it appears:

```bash
mkdir $USER    
ls
```

4. Go to that directory.

```bash
cd $USER      
```

:::{admonition} Auto complete
:class: seealso
If you just type `cd` and the first letter of the folder name, then hit `tab` key, the terminal completes the name. Handy!
:::


Add an empty file into this directory. 

```bash
touch $USER-first-file.txt    
```

Check that it is empty:

```bash
cat $USER-first-file.txt        
```

Fill it with some content:

:::{admonition} Command line editor
:class: seealso
These exercises are done with the `nano` editor, but you can use your favorite editor too.
Here's a [nano cheat sheet](https://www.nano-editor.org/dist/latest/cheatsheet.html).
:::


1. Open the file with `nano`:

```bash
nano $USER-first-file.txt     
```

2. Edit the file. Type something there!
3. Exit `nano` with `Ctrl+X`, type `Y` to confirm saving and press enter to accept the filename.
4. Check that the modifications are actually there:

```bash
less $USER-first-file.txt     
```

5. Exit the preview with `q`.


## Exploring files


1. Download a file into this new folder. Use the command `wget` for downloading from a URL:

```bash
wget https://github.com/csc-training/csc-env-eff/raw/master/_hands-on/linux_prerequisites/my-first-file.txt
```

2. Check what kind of file you got and what size it is using the `ls` command with some extra options:

```bash
ls -lth         # options are l for long format, t for sorting by time and h for convenient size units. 
```

3. Use the `less` command to check out what the file looks like:

```bash
less my-first-file.txt
```

4. To exit the `less` preview of the file, hit `q`.

:::{admonition} Tip
:class: seealso
Instead of `less` you can use `cat` which prints the content of the file(s) straight into the command line. For long texts `less` is recommended.
:::

5. Make a copy of this file:

```bash
cp my-first-file.txt $USER-second-file.txt    
ls -lth
less $USER-second-file.txt                    
```

6. Remove the file we originally downloaded (leave your own copy).

```bash
rm my-first-file.txt
ls
```

:::{admonition} Moving files
:class: seealso
If you don't want to have duplicate files you can use `mv` to 'move/rename' the file. Syntax is the same: `mv /path/to/source/oldname /path/to/destination/newname`.
:::


:::{admonition} Re-executing commands from `history`
:class: seealso
If you remember *a part of a command* that you have used recently you can search for it with the command `history | grep string`. This will show all your used commands that have included the string `string` (replace this with the pattern you are searching for).
:::
