materials/where_to_go.md, before:

# Where to go from here

:::{admonition} Keep practicing!
:class: tip

Computing course project available until 20.10.23

:::


## Connecting to the supercomputer via SSH

We have accessed the supercomputer via the webinterface in order to not overwhelm you with setups before the course. However, this way may not always be the most convenient. You can also directly connect your computer to the supercomputer via SSH.

:::{admonition} Connecting with SSH clients
:class: seealso, dropdown

- SSH clients give command-line access to a supercomputer or any other Linux server.
- Basic SSH connection will not allow displaying remote graphics, but it is possible to set up with extra settings, but in case of Puhti web interface is recommended.
- SSH clients:
   - Mac and Linux have Terminal for SSH connections.
   - In Windows:
      - `Command Prompt` or `Powershell` are always avaialbe and can be used for basic connections.
      - Special tools like [PuTTY](https://www.putty.org/) or [MobaXterm](https://mobaxterm.mobatek.net/) provide more options, inc possibility to save settings, but need installation.
- [CSC Docs: Connecting to CSC supercomputers](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/connecting/)
- [LUMI Docs: Get started](https://docs.lumi-supercomputer.eu/firststeps/).

:::

## Next steps

* (Create or get access to a CSC project)
* Choose suitable service for your task
  * Contact `servicedesk@csc.fi` if unsure
* Learn about the service
  * [`docs.csc.fi`](https://docs.csc.fi)
  * [Geocomputing using CSC resources](https://research.csc.fi/geocomputing)
  * [Geocomputing examples in github](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing)
  * [Visit courses, webinars, workshops](https://www.csc.fi/en/training)
* Ask for help, if needed, we don't bite :)

# How you can help


If you used any of our resources for your research, please acknowledge CSC and Geoportti in your publications, it is important for project continuation and funding reports. As an example, you can write:

> "The authors wish to thank CSC - IT Center for Science, Finland (urn:nbn:fi:research-infras-2016072531) and the Open Geospatial Information Infrastructure for Research (Geoportti, urn:nbn:fi:research-infras-2016072513) for computational resources and support".


## Training

* ['CSC computing environment' self-study course](https://ssl.eventilla.com/csccompenvselflearn)
* [CSC geoinformatics training materials](https://research.csc.fi/gis-learning-materials)
* [CSC Earth Observation tutorial](https://docs.csc.fi/support/tutorials/gis/eo_guide/)
* [LUMI 1-day training](https://lumi-supercomputer.github.io/LUMI-training-materials/1day-20230921/)
* ['Research data management' self-study course](https://ssl.eventilla.com/event/v8B6B)
* [CodeRefinery materials on FAIR research software development](https://coderefinery.org/lessons/core/)

-> follow our [training calendar](https://www.csc.fi/en/training#training-calendar)


## Get to know weekly user support session

Come to chat with our specialists about anything related to CSC resources! 
Special invite to you for 18.10 at 14, but we keep these sessions every week.
Sometimes with short talks about interesting topics. 

Details on the event webpage: https://ssl.eventilla.com/usersupportcoffee

Commit message:

Added SHH-keys sentence wit a link

materials/where_to_go.md, after:

# Where to go from here

:::{admonition} Keep practicing!
:class: tip

Computing course project available until 20.10.23

:::


## Connecting to the supercomputer via SSH

We have accessed the supercomputer via the webinterface in order to not overwhelm you with setups before the course. However, this way may not always be the most convenient. You can also directly connect your computer to the supercomputer via SSH.

:::{admonition} Connecting with SSH clients
:class: seealso, dropdown

- SSH clients give command-line access to a supercomputer or any other Linux server.
- Basic SSH connection will not allow displaying remote graphics, but it is possible to set up with extra settings.
- SSH clients:
   - Mac and Linux have Terminal for SSH connections.
   - In Windows:
      - `Command Prompt` or `Powershell` are always avaialbe and can be used for basic connections.
      - Special tools like [PuTTY](https://www.putty.org/) or [MobaXterm](https://mobaxterm.mobatek.net/) provide more options, inc possibility to save settings, but need installation.
- To avoid typing your password every time again and to make your connection more secure, you can [set up SSH-keys](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/connecting/#setting-up-ssh-keys).
- [CSC Docs: Connecting to CSC supercomputers](https://docs.csc.fi/computing/connecting/)
- [LUMI Docs: Get started](https://docs.lumi-supercomputer.eu/firststeps/).
- 

:::

## Next steps

* (Create or get access to a CSC project)
* Choose suitable service for your task
  * Contact `servicedesk@csc.fi` if unsure
* Learn about the service
  * [`docs.csc.fi`](https://docs.csc.fi)
  * [Geocomputing using CSC resources](https://research.csc.fi/geocomputing)
  * [Geocomputing examples in github](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing)
  * [Visit courses, webinars, workshops](https://www.csc.fi/en/training)
* Ask for help, if needed, we don't bite :)

# How you can help


If you used any of our resources for your research, please acknowledge CSC and Geoportti in your publications, it is important for project continuation and funding reports. As an example, you can write:

> "The authors wish to thank CSC - IT Center for Science, Finland (urn:nbn:fi:research-infras-2016072531) and the Open Geospatial Information Infrastructure for Research (Geoportti, urn:nbn:fi:research-infras-2016072513) for computational resources and support".


## Training

* ['CSC computing environment' self-study course](https://ssl.eventilla.com/csccompenvselflearn)
* [CSC geoinformatics training materials](https://research.csc.fi/gis-learning-materials)
* [CSC Earth Observation tutorial](https://docs.csc.fi/support/tutorials/gis/eo_guide/)
* [LUMI 1-day training](https://lumi-supercomputer.github.io/LUMI-training-materials/1day-20230921/)
* ['Research data management' self-study course](https://ssl.eventilla.com/event/v8B6B)
* [CodeRefinery materials on FAIR research software development](https://coderefinery.org/lessons/core/)

-> follow our [training calendar](https://www.csc.fi/en/training#training-calendar)


## Get to know weekly user support session

Come to chat with our specialists about anything related to CSC resources! 
Special invite to you for 18.10 at 14, but we keep these sessions every week.
Sometimes with short talks about interesting topics. 

Details on the event webpage: https://ssl.eventilla.com/usersupportcoffee
